---
title: Using the Bus
permalink: /docs/quickstart/bus
---

Silverback's main component is the internal in-memory message bus and pretty much all other features are built on top of that.

## Enabling the Bus

The first mandatory step to start using Silverback is to register the internal bus services with the .net core dependency injection.

```c#
public void ConfigureServices(IServiceCollection services)
{
    services.AddBus();
```

## Creating the Message model

First of all we need to create a message class. The message class can be any POCO class, it just need to be serializable.

```c#
using Silverback.Messaging.Messages;

public class SampleMessage
{
    public string Content { get; set; }
}
```

It is very much suggested to consider using the _Silverback.Core.Model_ package (documented in the [Model]({{ site.baseurl }}/docs/quickstart/model) page) to better organize your message and write better readable code.

## Publishing

To publish the message you just need an instance of `IPublisher` (or derived interfaces if using _Silverback.Core.Model_, documented in the [Model]({{ site.baseurl }}/docs/quickstart/model).

```c#
using Silverback.Messaging.Publishing;

public class PublishingService
{
    private readonly IPublisher _publisher;

    public MyService(IPublisher publisher)
    {
        _publisher = publisher;
    }

    public async Task PublishSomething()
    {
        await _publisher.PublishAsync(new SampleMessage 
        { 
            Content = "whatever"
        });
    }
}
```

The publisher always exposes a synchronous and an asynchronous version of each method. The second option is of course to be preferred to take advantage of non-blocking async/await.

### Return values

In some case you want to catch a response to your message.

```c#
public async Task<Report> PublishSomething()
{
    var result = await _publisher.PublishAsync(new ReportQuery() { ... });

    return result.Single();
}
```

**Important!** Please note the required call to `Single()`, because Silverback allows you to have multiple subscribers for the same message and therefore collect multiple return values.
{: .notice--warning}

### Batches

It is possible to publish multiple messages with a single call to `Publish` or `PublishAsync`. The effect is very different than looping and calling the publish for each message since the collection will be handled as a batch, enabling parallel processing. It is always suggested to publish multiple messages with the overloads accepting an `IEnumerable<>` and let the subscriber decide between parallel or sequential processing.

## Subscribing

Now all is left to do is write a subscriber method to process the produced messages.

### Attribute-based subscription

The default and usually preferred way to subscribe is by decorating the methods with the `SubscribeAttribute`.

```c#
using Silverback.Messaging.Subscribers;

public class SubscribingService : ISubscriber
{
    [Subscribe]
    public async Task OnMessageReceived(SampleMessage message)
    {
        // ...your message handling loging...
    }
}
```
```c#
public void ConfigureServices(IServiceCollection services)
{
    services
        .AddBus()
        .AddScoped<ISubscriber, SubscribingService>();
```

The `SubscribeAttribute` exposes three extra properties:
* `Exclusive`: A boolean value indicating whether the method can be executed concurrently to other methods handling the **same message**. The default value is `true` (the method will be executed sequentially to other subscribers).
* `Parallel`: A boolean value indicating whether the method can be executed concurrently when multiple messages are fired at the same time (e.g. in a batch). The default value is `false` (the messages are processed sequentially).
* `MaxDegreeOfParallelism`: Limit the number of messages that are processed concurrently. Used only together with `Parallel = true` and mostly useful when performing CPU-bound work (as opposed to non-blocking I/O). The default value is `Int32.Max` and means that there is no limit to the degree of parallelism.

Silverback per default will look for subscribers in classes implementing `ISubscriber` and those services must be registered with the service provider as shown in the second code snippet above. 

If you don't want to implement `ISubscriber` you can make Silverback look for other types.

```c#
public void Configure(BusConfigurator busConfigurator)
{
    busConfigurator
        .Subscribe<MyBaseType>();
```

### Delegate based subscription

It is also possible to subscribe an inline lambda or integrate an existing method without having to modify the codebase to add the `SubscribeAttribute`.

```c#
public void Configure(BusConfigurator busConfigurator)
{
    busConfigurator
        .Subscribe((IEnumerable<IMessage> msg) => HandleMessage(msg));
```

### Supported methods and parameters

The subscribed method can either be synchronous or asynchronous, but the asynchronous approach should be preferred if aiming at taking advantage of non-blocking I/O.

The first parameter must be the message or the collection of messages.
The following collection are supported:
* `IEnumerable<TMessage>`: To be able to handle a batch of messages at once. It will receive also the single messages (in an enumerable with a single item).
* `Observable<TMessage>`: _Silverback.Core.Rx_ allows you to handle your messages in a reactive programming fashion.

Using a collection as parameter allows you to handle a batch of messages at once, allowing more control. The methods with a collection as parameter will still be called for single messages and methods with a single message as input parameter will be called for each message in a batch (in parallel, if allowed by the specified configuration).

```c#
using Silverback.Messaging.Subscribers;

public class SubscribingService : ISubscriber
{
    [Subscribe(Parallel=true)]
    public async Task OnMessageReceived(Observable<SampleMessage> stream) =>
        stream...Subscribe(...);
}
```
The method can have other parameters that will be resolved using the service provider. Very useful also to integrate existing code.

```c#
public void Configure(BusConfigurator busConfigurator)
{
    busConfigurator
        .Subscribe(BasketCheckoutMessage msg, CheckoutService service) => service.Handle(msg));
```

### Return values

A subscriber can also have a return value that can be collected by the publisher.

```c#
using Silverback.Messaging.Subscribers;

public class SubscribingService : ISubscriber
{
    [Subscribe(Parallel=true)]
    public async Task<SampleResult> OnMessageReceived(SampleMessage message)
    {
        ...

        return new SampleResult(...);
    }
}
```

### Return new messages (republishing)

A subscribed method can also optionally return a message or a collection of messages (either `IEnumerable<TMessage>` or `Observable<TMessage>` if using _Silverback.Core.Rx_) that will be automatically republished to the internal bus.

Silverback recognizes per default only the messages implementing `IMessage` but you can register your own types.

```c#
public void Configure(BusConfigurator busConfigurator)
{
    busConfigurator
        .HandleMessagesOfType<MyCustomType>();
```